Added AEP for multi-dimensional pod autoscaler (#5342)
kubernetes/autoscaler: multidimensional-pod-autoscaler/KEP.md

Due to the independence of these two controllers, they can lead to an awkward situation where VPA tries to squeeze the pods into smaller sizes based on their measured utilization.
Still, HPA tries to scale out the applications to improve the customized performance metrics.
It is also [not recommended] to use HPA together with VPA for CPU or memory metrics.
Therefore, there is a need to combine the two controllers so that horizontal and vertical scaling decisions are made in combination for an application to achieve both objectives, including resource efficiency and the application service-level agreements (SLA)/performance goals.
However, existing VPA/HPA designs cannot accommodate such requirements.
Manual fine-tuning the timing or frequency to do vertical/horizontal scaling and prioritization are usually needed for synchronization of the HPA and VPA.

[HPA]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/
[VPA]: https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler
[not recommended]: https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/horizontalpodautoscaler

### Goals

> - Design and implement a holistic framework with a set of controllers to achieve multi-dimensional pod autoscaling (MPA).

Author: SGTM! The separation of decision recommendation and execution enables users to replace the default recommender with their customized recommender. I'll add this goal explicitly.

[<img src="./kep-imgs/mpa-design.png" width="700"/>](./kep-imgs/mpa-design.png "MPA Design Overview")

**MPA API.** Application owners specify the autoscaling configurations which include (1) whether they only want to know the recommendations from MPA or they want MPA to directly actuate the autoscaling decisions; (2) application SLAs (e.g., in terms of latency or throughput); (3) any custom metrics if there are; and (4) other autoscaling configurations that exist in HPA and VPA (e.g., desired resource utilizations, container update policies, min and max number of replicas). MPA API is also responsible for connecting the autoscaling actions generated from the MPA Recommender to MPA Admission Controller and Updater which actually execute the scaling actions. MPA API is created based on the [multidimensional Pod scaling service] (not open-sourced) provided by Google. MPA API is a Custom Resource Definition (CRD) in Kubernetes and each MPA instance is a CR. MPA CR keeps track of recommendations on target requests and target replica numbers.

[multidimensional Pod scaling service]: https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/multidimensional-pod-autoscaling

> **Metric Server API.** The Metric Server API serves both default metrics or custom metrics associated with any Kubernetes objects. Custom metrics could be the application latency, throughput, or any other application-specific metrics. HPA already consumes metrics from such [a variety of metric APIs] (e.g., `metrics.k8s.io` API for resource metrics provided by metrics-server, `custom.metrics.k8s.io` API for custom metrics provided by "adapter" API servers provided by metrics solution vendors, and the `external.metrics.k8s.io` API for external metrics provided by the custom metrics adapters as well. A popular choice for the metrics collector is Prometheus. The metrics are then used by the MPA Recommender for making autoscaling decisions.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about `Metric Server API`, feels like an overloaded term and readers may assume that all these APIs are being served by the [Metrics Server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server)? Would `Metric Serving APIs` or `Metrics APIs` maybe be clearer?

Author: I agree that the term `Metric Server API` here is inappropriate, and it's used to refer to the specific Metrics Server. Thanks for pointing it out! I'll change the term to `Metrics APIs` for clarity.

**MPA Admission-Controller.** If users intend to directly execute the autoscaling recommendations generated from the MPA Recommender, the MPA Admission-Controller will update the deployment configuration (i.e., the size of each replica) and configure the rolling update to the Application Deployment.

### Action Actuation Implementation

To actuate the decisions without losing availability, we plan to (1) evict pods with min-replicas configured and update Pod sizes with the web-hooked admission controller (for vertical scaling), and (2) add or remove replicas (for horizontal scaling).
We use a web-hooked admission controller to manage vertical scaling because if the actuator directly updates the vertical scaling configurations through deployment, it will potentially overload etcd (as vertical scaling might be quite frequent).
MPA Admission Controller intercepts Pod creation requests and rewrites the request by applying recommended resources to the Pod spec.
We do not use the web-hooked admission controller to manage the horizontal scaling as it could slow down the pod creation process.

> In the future when the in-place vertical resizing is enabled, we can remove the web-hooked admission controller and only have the updater.

Reviewer: Unclear here, is the dependency on the VPA supporting in-place updates of container resources, or just the underlying kubelet behaviour?

Could we add a diagram of what that future state would look like?

Author: The dependency is on the underlying kubelet behavior, which is described in [this thread](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1287). I'll add a diagram here and clarify the dependency.

Reviewer 2: The `in-place pod vertical scaling` feature can be picked up by MPA when the [issue#4016](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/4016) is solved in VPA.

[<img src="./kep-imgs/mpa-action-actuation.png" width="400"/>](./kep-imgs/mpa-action-actuation.png "MPA Action Actuation")

Pros:
- Vertical scaling is handled by webhooks to avoid overloading etcd
- Horizontal scaling is handled through deployment to avoid extra overhead by webhooks
- Authentication and authorization for vertical scaling are handled by admission webhooks
- Recommendation and the actuation are completely separated

Cons:
- Webhooks introduce extra overhead for vertical scaling operations (can be avoided after in-place resizing of pod is enabled without eviction)
- Vertical and horizontal scaling executions are separated (can be avoided after in-place resizing of pod is enabled without eviction)
- State changes in pod sizes are not persisted (too much to keep in etcd, could use Prometheus to store pod state changes)

### Action Recommendation Implementation

To generate the vertical scaling action recommendation, we reuse VPA libraries as much as possible to implement scaling algorithm integrated with the newly generated MPA API code.
To do that, we need to update accordingly the code which reads and updates the VPA objects to be interacting with the MPA objects.

> To generate the horizontal scaling action recommendation, we reuse HPA libraries, integrating with the MPA API code, to reads and updates the MPA objects.

Reviewer: Are we certain the existing HPA code can be reused as a library, or will this potentially require changes in k/k to make this code more easily reusable? Is there a risk that we become dependent on guarantees that the HPA k/k code doesn't provide?

Reviewer 2: There is no need to change code k/k for now.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure here. I believe it was possible to import HPA code and reuse it with little modification. But HPA code in k/k doesn't seem to have a well defined API to be used as library at the moment. Let's think about the right API for code reuse in HPA so that we don't end up with having to fix MPA whenever current method signatures change in HPA. I guess we would need concrete PR to see if the current API is fine or what is missing.

Interesting side-note: how will we know when making code changes to k/k HPA that we don't break MPA by mistake?

Author: That's a good point. The current plan is to have a maintainer watch the imported HPA library for incorporating new changes that will necessarily affect MPA.

[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

#### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

MPA can be enabled by checking the prerequisite and executing `./deploy/mpa-up.sh`.

#### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No.

#### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

MPA can be disabled by executing `./deploy/mpa-down.sh`.

#### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

No impact will happen because everytime MPA is enabled it is a full new reset and restart of MPA.

#### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

End-to-end test of MPA will be included in the beta version.

### Dependencies

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

#### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

MPA relies on cluster-level service metrics-server and the API server needs to support Mutating Webhooks.

> ### Scalability

Reviewer: We call out some concerns around scalability/frequency of updates and potential impacts on etcd higher up, could we make a first pass at addressing some of the scalability questions based on the thinking you've already done here?

> # KEP-5342: Multi-dimensional Pod Autoscaler

Reviewer 4: This is a made up KEP ID.

Reviewer 2: For this question, we are unsure if Kubernetes is the right target. We would like to start with the autoscaler as the code base mostly reuses existing VPA and HPA.

## Design Details

Our proposed MPA framework consists of three controllers (i.e., a recommender, an updater, and an admission controller) and an MPA API (i.e., a CRD object or CR) that connects the autoscaling recommendations to actuation. The figure below describes the architectural overview of the proposed MPA framework.

[<img src="./kep-imgs/mpa-design.png" width="700"/>](./kep-imgs/mpa-design.png "MPA Design Overview")

> **MPA API.** Application owners specify the autoscaling configurations which include (1) whether they only want to know the recommendations from MPA or they want MPA to directly actuate the autoscaling decisions; (2) application SLAs (e.g., in terms of latency or throughput); (3) any custom metrics if there are; and (4) other autoscaling configurations that exist in HPA and VPA (e.g., desired resource utilizations, container update policies, min and max number of replicas). MPA API is also responsible for connecting the autoscaling actions generated from the MPA Recommender to MPA Admission Controller and Updater which actually execute the scaling actions. MPA API is created based on the [multidimensional Pod scaling service] (not open-sourced) provided by Google. MPA API is a Custom Resource Definition (CRD) in Kubernetes and each MPA instance is a CR. MPA CR keeps track of recommendations on target requests and target replica numbers.

Reviewer 5: "(2) application SLAs" seems to be missing from the MPA spec below.

Author: Added to the spec.

> **MPA API.** Application owners specify the autoscaling configurations which include (1) whether they only want to know the recommendations from MPA or they want MPA to directly actuate the autoscaling decisions; (2) application SLAs (e.g., in terms of latency or throughput); (3) any custom metrics if there are; and (4) other autoscaling configurations that exist in HPA and VPA (e.g., desired resource utilizations, container update policies, min and max number of replicas). MPA API is also responsible for connecting the autoscaling actions generated from the MPA Recommender to MPA Admission Controller and Updater which actually execute the scaling actions. MPA API is created based on the [multidimensional Pod scaling service] (not open-sourced) provided by Google. MPA API is a Custom Resource Definition (CRD) in Kubernetes and each MPA instance is a CR. MPA CR keeps track of recommendations on target requests and target replica numbers.

Author: Done.

[a variety of metric APIs]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#support-for-metrics-apis

**MPA Recommender.** MPA Recommender retrieves the time-indexed measurement data from the Metrics APIs and generates the vertical and horizontal scaling actions. The actions from the MPA Recommender are then updated in the MPA API object. The autoscaling behavior is based on user-defined configurations. Users can implement their own recommenders as well.

**MPA Updater.** MPA Updater will update the number of replicas in the deployment and evict the eligible pods for vertical scaling.

**MPA Admission-Controller.** If users intend to directly execute the autoscaling recommendations generated from the MPA Recommender, the MPA Admission-Controller will update the deployment configuration (i.e., the size of each replica) and configure the rolling update to the Application Deployment.

### Action Actuation Implementation

> To actuate the decisions without losing availability, we plan to (1) evict pods with min-replicas configured and update Pod sizes with the web-hooked admission controller (for vertical scaling), and (2) add or remove replicas (for horizontal scaling).

Author: Done.

> To actuate the decisions without losing availability, we plan to (1) evict pods with min-replicas configured and update Pod sizes with the web-hooked admission controller (for vertical scaling), and (2) add or remove replicas (for horizontal scaling).

Author: It is shown on the arrow from the admission controller to the deployment where it says resizing pods in the left figure. Let me know if it's not concise or needs clarification here.

> To actuate the decisions without losing availability, we plan to (1) evict pods with min-replicas configured and update Pod sizes with the web-hooked admission controller (for vertical scaling), and (2) add or remove replicas (for horizontal scaling).

Reviewer 2: > HPA packages without refactoring them (as mention

> I left a few small comments.
> 
> But I have one bigger question. I'm not sure what will be implemented as result of this KEP.
> 
> * Refactoring VPA and HPA so that they can be used a libraries?
> * MPA API?
> * MPA recommender / updater / admission controller?
 
There will be an MPA API, MPA recommender/updater/admission controller. However, inside each controller, it will reuse VPA and HPA libraries as much as possible.

We use a web-hooked admission controller to manage vertical scaling because if the actuator directly updates the vertical scaling configurations through deployment, it will potentially overload etcd (as vertical scaling might be quite frequent).
MPA Admission Controller intercepts Pod creation requests and rewrites the request by applying recommended resources to the Pod spec.
We do not use the web-hooked admission controller to manage the horizontal scaling as it could slow down the pod creation process.

> In the future when the [in-place vertical resizing](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1287) is enabled, we can remove the web-hooked admission controller and only have the updater.

Author: That's a good point! I changed it to that we will keep the original webhook-based update as an option in addition to the new in-place update.

> In the future when the [in-place vertical resizing](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1287) is enabled, we can remove the web-hooked admission controller and only have the updater.

Reviewer 2: The plan is to wait for VPA to adopt the in-place update first, and then we will update the VPA libraries in MPA to adopt it in MPA as well. Namely, it will support in-place update when the [issue#4016](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/4016) is resolved.

[<img src="./kep-imgs/mpa-action-actuation.png" width="400"/>](./kep-imgs/mpa-action-actuation.png "MPA Action Actuation")

Pros:
- Vertical scaling is handled by webhooks to avoid overloading etcd
- Horizontal scaling is handled through deployment to avoid extra overhead by webhooks
- Authentication and authorization for vertical scaling are handled by admission webhooks
- Recommendation and the actuation are completely separated

Cons:
- Webhooks introduce extra overhead for vertical scaling operations (can be avoided after in-place resizing of pod is enabled without eviction)
- Vertical and horizontal scaling executions are separated (can be avoided after in-place resizing of pod is enabled without eviction)
- State changes in pod sizes are not persisted (too much to keep in etcd, could use Prometheus to store pod state changes)

### Action Recommendation Implementation

To generate the vertical scaling action recommendation, we reuse VPA libraries as much as possible to implement scaling algorithm integrated with the newly generated MPA API code.
To do that, we need to update accordingly the code which reads and updates the VPA objects to be interacting with the MPA objects.

> To generate the horizontal scaling action recommendation, we reuse HPA libraries, integrating with the MPA API code, to reads and updates the MPA objects.

Author: Corrected.

The separation of recommendation and actuation allows customized recommender to be used to replace the default recommender.
For example, users can plug-in their RL-based controller to replace the MPA recommender, receiving measurements from the Metrics Server and modifying the MPA objects directly to give recommendations.

The implementation of the MPA framework (the backend) is based on the existing HPA and VPA codebase so that it only requires minimum code maintenance.
Reused Codebase References:
- HPA: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/pkg/controller/podautoscaler
- VPA: https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler

### MPA API Object

We reuse the CR definitions from the [MultidimPodAutoscaler](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/multidimensional-pod-autoscaling) object developed by Google.
`MultidimPodAutoscaler` is the configuration for multi-dimensional Pod autoscaling, which automatically manages Pod resources and their count based on historical and real-time resource utilization.
MultidimPodAutoscaler has two main fields: `spec` and `status`.

#### MPA Spec

```

> # MultidimPodAutoscalerSpec

Reviewer 4: This is an object, not a spec

Author: Corrected

apiVersion: autoscaling.gke.io/v1beta1
kind: MultidimPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: my-autoscaler
spec:
  scaleTargetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: my-target
  updatePolicy:
    updateMode: Auto
  metrics:
  - type: Resource
    resource:
    # Define the target CPU utilization request here
    name: cpu
    target:
      type: Utilization
      averageUtilization: target-cpu-util
  constraints:
    minReplicas: min-num-replicas

>     maxReplicas: max-num-replicas

Reviewer 4: I'd expect to see the minimum and maximum memory (or other resources) listed here.

Author: The min/max memory is specified under the resource policy field, following the convention defined in the verticalpodautoscaler spec. Let me know if that is confusing.

[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

#### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

MPA can be enabled by checking the prerequisite and executing `./deploy/mpa-up.sh`.

#### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No.

#### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

MPA can be disabled by executing `./deploy/mpa-down.sh`.

#### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

No impact will happen because everytime MPA is enabled it is a full new reset and restart of MPA.

#### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

End-to-end test of MPA will be included in the beta version.

### Dependencies

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

#### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

> MPA relies on cluster-level service metrics-server and the API server needs to support Mutating Webhooks.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
MPA relies on cluster-level `metrics.k8s.io` API (for example, from [metrics-server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server))
For the evict-and-replace mechanism, the API server needs to support the MutatingAdmissionWebhook API.
```
